Improve theming documentation (#1615)
vaadin/docs: articles/styling/lumo/variants/light-dark.adoc

---
title: Light and Dark Modes
description: Learn how to enable Lumo light and dark theme variants.
order: 10
---

= Lumo Light and Dark Modes

Lumo light and dark mode variants can be used to quickly customize all components in your application.
By default, Lumo uses the light theme.

This guide describes the three main approaches to applying Lumo light and dark mode variants:

* Enable the dark mode permanently for the whole application.
* Dynamically enable the light and dark modes, which is commonly used to allow end users to toggle between the light and dark modes.
* Enable the light or dark mode to specific components in your application.

== Enable Dark Mode Permanently

To enable the dark mode permanently for the whole application, use the `@Theme` annotation, specifying the `variant` parameter to `Lumo.DARK`.

[source, java]
----
@Theme(variant = Lumo.DARK) 
----

== Dynamically Enable Light and Dark Mode

We often want to enable our application users to choose themselves between light and dark mode. 

> For this we cannot use the `@Theme` annotation as it sets the variant permanently for the whole application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this, we cannot use the `@Theme` annotation, as it sets the variant permanently for the whole application.

```

Instead, we can use the `ThemeList` object of the UI to enable the user to choose between light and dark mode.
This approach is demonstrated in the following view:

[source, java]
----
@Route("")
public class MainView extends VerticalLayout {

    public MainView() {
        H1 h1 = new H1("Hello darkness");

>         Button toggleButton = new Button("Toggle dark theme", click -> {
>             ThemeList themeList = UI.getCurrent().getElement().getThemeList(); // <1>
> 
>             if (themeList.contains(Lumo.DARK)) { // <2>
>                 themeList.remove(Lumo.DARK);
>             } else {
>                 themeList.add(Lumo.DARK);
>             }
>         });
> 
>         add(toggleButton, h1);
>     }
> }
> ----
> <1> Get the list of currently applied theme variants.
> <2> Toggle between the light and dark themes.

Author: ```suggestion
        Button toggleButton = new Button("Toggle dark theme", click -> {
            getElement().executeJs("return document.documentElement.getAttribute('theme')"). // <1>
                    then(String.class, result -> {
                        if (result == null || result.equals("light")) { // <2>
                            getElement().executeJs("document.documentElement.setAttribute('theme', 'dark')");
                        } else {
                            getElement().executeJs("document.documentElement.setAttribute('theme', 'light')");
                        }
                    });
        });
        
        add(toggleButton, h1);
    }
}
----
<1> Execute a JavaScript call to return the `theme` attribute value from the browser.
<2> Toggle between the light and dark themes depending on the returned `theme` attribute value.

```

@jouni like this?

Reviewer 2: If it works, sure. I didn't consider reading the current value from the DOM, I might’ve just stored that as a variable in the Java class instead, and toggle based on that.

I think this solution results in two server round trips / HTTP request. First the button click, which goes to the server, which then sends back the JS execution snippet. That executeJs callback then results in another HTTP request with the results of the script, and then the server sends back another JS execution snippet.

If we store the value in the Java class, then it would just be one HTTP request to the server.

Author: Yes, you are right about the number of client/server trips. But isn't it more robust to read the value from the DOM because the Java class might not be aware of what has been set in other places in the application?

Reviewer 2: Sure, that can happen, if client-side logic updates the value as well. I’ll let you decide. Maybe you can explain that tradeoff in the text?

Reviewer 2: The client-side logic could of course call some server-side method to keep it in sync.

Author: I feel that the overhead with two client-server roundtrips is so small that my current solution is ok. I mean, people don't constantly keep toggling dark and light themes.

Author: So my vote goes to keeping the current solution as it is.

Reviewer 2: Alright then 👍
